product docs toolset to blog (#9061)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/blog/2026-05-07-devil-in-the-docs.md

---
title: "The devil is in the docs"
description: "The devil in the details and the details are the docs that we write."
slug: the-devil-in-the-docs
authors: [mirna_wong]
tags: [ai, docs]
hide_table_of_contents: false
date: 2026-04-30
is_featured: true

> ---

Author: i think i might put a preview url ima here

So when an agent was asked *"how do I configure incremental models?"*, it improvised or used training data, pattern matching, best guess. The docs kinda existed. The path to them didn't.

<Lightbox src="/img/blog/2026-04-30-the-devil-is-in-the-docs/dwp-meme.png" title="Miranda mad at AI for hallucinating about incremental models" />

## The research: what the data actually showed

Earlier this year we'd been discussing docs data and how AI tools are now fetching them to answer questions. The term 'canonical docs' was mentioned and I struggled to understand what it meant and how it was different from the docs we were already building. But then [Google announced their new docs API and MCP server](https://developers.googleblog.com/introducing-the-developer-knowledge-api-and-mcp-server/) &mdash; then it clicked! Docs are now canonical and more important than ever in the AI era 💃💃💃!

> So we chatted about this and toyed with the idea of either:

Reviewer: I would capitalize the 1st letter in these bullet points to match the other bullets.

## The gap: docs were there, but not natively delivered

Think of Andy in *The Devil Wears Prada* &mdash; constantly fielding requests for information she could theoretically find, but scrambling each time because it isn't at her fingertips. She's not uninformed. She's just not connected to the right source when it counts.

That was the [dbt MCP server's](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp) relationship with the docs:

- The open source documentation at [docs.getdbt.com](https://docs.getdbt.com) is carefully maintained (by the docs team _and_ our amazing dbt community), up-to-date, and formatted for humans, of course. And now machine consumption: there's an `llms.txt` index, a full-content flat file, and markdown output on every page. We have an `AGENTS.md` file that lists how to access the docs via web requests. The source was solid and accessible.
- The dbt MCP server &mdash; where dbt users interact with dbt through AI tools &mdash; couldn't reach any of it by default. It has eight toolset categories: CLI, Semantic Layer, Discovery, Admin API, SQL, Codegen, Fusion, Server Metadata. But none of them connected to the live docs by default. It didn't have our docs as its canonical source.

> So when an agent was asked *"how do I configure incremental models?"*, it might search online, pull from training data, or piece together an answer &mdash; but it wasn't grounded in the canonical source by default. A direct, native path to the docs didn't exist inside the server.

Reviewer 2: I am not 100% sure about this formulation. It could very well fetch the docs using its own tools ; and in that case it would get the same information.

Maybe another angle would be saying that sometimes it was fetching the docs and sometimes not ; so the tool in the MCP server made it more consistent? Or maybe talking about the fact that it was retrieving the docs in HTML and not in markdown so it was not token efficient? This feels more accurate than "without docs tools the LLM had no clue"

<Lightbox src="/img/blog/2026-04-30-the-devil-is-in-the-docs/dwp-meme.png" width="45%"title="Miranda mad at AI for hallucinating about incremental models (but for real an actual response I received from AI when I was adding the docs tools to the MCP server)" />

## The research: using the data to make better decisions

> Earlier this year we'd been discussing docs data and how AI tools are now fetching them to answer questions. The term 'canonical docs' was mentioned and I struggled to understand what it meant and how it was different from the docs we were already building. But then [Google announced their new docs API and MCP server](https://developers.googleblog.com/introducing-the-developer-knowledge-api-and-mcp-server/) &mdash; then it clicked! Docs are now canonical and more important than ever in the AI era 💃💃💃!

Reviewer 2: First time I am hearing about "canonical docs". Is it a common expression?

Author: we heard it from marketing so maybe it's more commonly used in that space but i can just change it to source of truth!

The dbt MCP server could already handle lineage lookups, test runs, Semantic Layer queries, job debugging. But ask it *"what's the syntax for a snapshot strategy?"* and it might get it right or it might get it wrong or it might improvise. Training data. Best guess. The Book wasn't being "delivered".

✨ **The solution:** We added two tools to the dbt MCP server under a new **"Product Docs"** category — the ninth toolset✨:

- **[`search_product_docs`](/docs/dbt-ai/mcp-available-tools?version=2.0#product-docs)** &mdash; searches docs.getdbt.com and returns titles, URLs, and relevance-ranked descriptions for pages matching your query.
- **[`get_product_doc_pages`](/docs/dbt-ai/mcp-available-tools?version=2.0#product-docs)** &mdash; fetches the full markdown content of one or more docs pages by path or URL.

The workflow mirrors how a human would use the docs: search first to find what's relevant, then fetch the full content. The difference is that it happens inside whatever AI tool you're already using, without a context switching headache. 

> Alongside this, [dbt agent skills](https://skills.sh/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills) &mdash; including `fetching-dbt-docs` &mdash; remain the best path for agents not connected via MCP. The two complement each other: the skill proved the demand; the MCP tools are the native solution.

Reviewer 2: We already mentioned `fetching-dbt-docs` before. Do we need to call out this skill multiple times?

---
title: "The devil is in the docs"
description: "The devil in the details and the details are the docs that we write. How we're bringing those decisions closer to users in the AI era."
slug: the-devil-in-the-docs
authors: [mirna_wong]
tags: [ai, docs, mcp]
hide_table_of_contents: false

> date: 2026-05-07

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2026-05-15
```

is_featured: true
image: /img/blog/2026-04-30-the-devil-is-in-the-docs/devil-in-the-docsv2.png
---

> > *"By all means, move at a glacier's pace."*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> *"By all means, move at a glacial pace."*
```

> — Miranda Priestly, *[The Devil Wears Prada](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Devil_Wears_Prada_(film))*

> There's another scene in _The Devil Wears Prada_ that I think about more than that one. If you haven't seen it yet, I'll try not to spoil it for you. Miranda turns to Andy (Miranda's assistant) and explains, with complete "patience", that the [cerulean blue](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerulean) in Andy's "lumpy sweater" didn't come out of thin air &mdash; it's traced back through a chain of deliberate fashion decisions made years earlier, by people who thought carefully about every choice. The sweater Andy bought from the store was the end of a long chain of deliberate _curation_, carefully veiled behind a raw silk curtain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's another scene in _The Devil Wears Prada_ that I think about more than that one. If you haven't seen it yet, I'll try not to spoil it for you. Miranda turns to Andy (Miranda's assistant) and explains, with complete "patience", that the [cerulean blue](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerulean) in Andy's "lumpy sweater" didn't come out of thin air &mdash; it's traced back through a chain of deliberate fashion decisions made years earlier, by people who thought carefully about every choice. The sweater Andy bought from the store was the end of a long chain of deliberate _curation_, carefully veiled to protect the illusion that the sweater effortlessly came into existence.
```

> There's another scene in _The Devil Wears Prada_ that I think about more than that one. If you haven't seen it yet, I'll try not to spoil it for you. Miranda turns to Andy (Miranda's assistant) and explains, with complete "patience", that the [cerulean blue](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerulean) in Andy's "lumpy sweater" didn't come out of thin air &mdash; it's traced back through a chain of deliberate fashion decisions made years earlier, by people who thought carefully about every choice. The sweater Andy bought from the store was the end of a long chain of deliberate _curation_, carefully veiled to protect the illusion that the sweater effortlessly came into existence.

Reviewer 3: Love this scene <3

That's how I'd describe documentation, especially in the AI era. A user &mdash; could be a developer, analyst, data engineer &mdash; asks an AI tool a question and gets an answer. They don't _need_ to see every decision in the chain behind it: what to include, how to structure it, where the gaps are, what needs updating. But those decisions shape every answer they get. Somewhere upstream, a docs team is making careful, deliberate choices that ripple all the way down to the moment the answer lands in the user's editor.

This blog discusses how docs teams are trying to bring those decisions closer to users &mdash; and why that architecture matters more than ever in the AI era.

<!-- truncate -->

## The gap: docs were there, but not natively delivered

Think of Andy in *The Devil Wears Prada* &mdash; constantly fielding requests for information she could theoretically find, but scrambling each time because it isn't at her fingertips. She's not uninformed. She's just not connected to the right source when it counts.

That was the [dbt MCP server's](/docs/dbt-ai/about-mcp) relationship with the docs:

> - The open source documentation at [docs.getdbt.com](https://docs.getdbt.com) is carefully maintained (by the docs team _and_ our amazing dbt community), up-to-date, and formatted for humans, of course. And now machine consumption: there's an `llms.txt` index, a full-content flat file, and markdown output on every page. We have an `AGENTS.md` file that lists how to access the docs via web requests. The source was solid and accessible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The open source documentation at [docs.getdbt.com](https://docs.getdbt.com) is carefully maintained (by the docs team _and_ our amazing dbt community), up-to-date, and formatted for humans, of course. And now machine consumption: there's an `llms.txt` index, a full-content flat file, and Markdown output on every page. We have an `AGENTS.md` file that lists how to access the docs via web requests. The source was solid and accessible.
```

- The dbt MCP server &mdash; where dbt users interact with dbt through AI tools &mdash; couldn't reach any of it by default. It has eight toolset categories: CLI, Semantic Layer, Discovery, Admin API, SQL, Codegen, Fusion, Server Metadata. But none of them connected to the live docs by default. It didn't have our docs as its main source.

> So when an agent was asked *"how do I configure incremental models?"*, it could in theory reach the docs with its own browsing tools, but the experience was inconsistent. Sometimes it fetched a page, sometimes it leaned on training data or pieced an answer together; and when it _did_ fetch, it usually pulled rendered HTML rather than the markdown source &mdash; heavier, noisier, and less token-efficient. There was no direct, native path inside the server that pointed agents at the canonical docs in their cleanest form by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So when an agent was asked *"how do I configure incremental models?"*, it could in theory reach the docs with its own browsing tools, but the experience was inconsistent. Sometimes it fetched a page, sometimes it leaned on training data or pieced an answer together; and when it _did_ fetch, it usually pulled rendered HTML rather than the Markdown source &mdash; heavier, noisier, and less token-efficient. There was no direct, native path inside the server that pointed agents at the canonical docs in their cleanest form by default.
```

<Lightbox src="/img/blog/2026-04-30-the-devil-is-in-the-docs/dwp-meme.png" width="45%"title="Miranda mad at AI for hallucinating about incremental models (but for real an actual response I received from AI when I was adding the docs tools to the MCP server)" />

> ## The research: using the data to make better decisions

Reviewer 3: [Non-blocker] One small thought on this section: The other sections weave in DWP references -- maybe we can add something here, too?

What if we mention the moment Andy finally does her homework at Runway (studying the designers, the history, who's who) to anticipate Miranda's needs? I think it's similar to what this section is about: pulling the data, weighing the options, making a deliberate call before committing to a solution

Earlier this year we'd been discussing docs data and how AI tools are now fetching them to answer questions. The term 'canonical docs' was mentioned and I struggled to understand what it meant and how it was different from the docs we were already building. But then [Google announced their new docs API and MCP server](https://developers.googleblog.com/introducing-the-developer-knowledge-api-and-mcp-server/) &mdash; then it clicked! Docs are now the source of truth (canonical source) and more important than ever in the AI era 💃💃💃!

So we chatted about this and toyed with the idea of either:
- Building a new docs MCP server, which meant starting from scratch and building all the infrastructure from the ground up

> - Adding docs tools to the existing dbt MCP server, which meant we would need to add the docs toolset category to the existing dbt MCP server (which already has users and set up)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Adding docs tools to the existing dbt MCP server, which meant we would need to add the docs toolset category to the existing dbt MCP server (which already has users and is set up)
```

> - Leaving it alone since we have the docs in [dbt agent skills](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills) (shout out to the amazing work from the DX team!), which is way forward for users who install the dbt agent skills.

Reviewer 3: Removing for consistency
```suggestion
- Leaving it alone since we have the docs in [dbt agent skills](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills) (shout out to the amazing work from the DX team!), which is way forward for users who install the dbt agent skills
```

But that still left us with the question of how to get the docs closer to users in a way that is easy to use and maintain.

> We ran some sql queries using Fusion in the [dbt VS Code extension](/docs/install-dbt-extension?version=2.0) and also used [Insights](/docs/explore/dbt-insights?version=2.0) for exploratory analysis in our internal dbt platform account:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We ran some SQL queries using Fusion in the [dbt VS Code extension](/docs/install-dbt-extension?version=2.0) and also used [Insights](/docs/explore/dbt-insights?version=2.0) for exploratory analysis in our internal dbt platform account:
```

We saw that the dbt MCP server had these benefits:

> - Great adoption already and had a ton of the infrastructure in place. Adding the docs tools would be a natural extension of that and would be a great way to get the docs closer to users

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Great adoption already, with a ton of infrastructure in place. Adding the docs tools would be a natural extension of that, bringing docs directly to users where they already work.
```

- Eight toolset categories already but none of them could directly access docs.getdbt.com.
- Open source and free, which also meant every user would get docs access automatically.

But the problem was when an agent needed to answer *"how do I configure incremental models?"* &mdash; it might search the web or pull from training data, but there was no guaranteed path to the main source of truth, the current docs.

As mentioned above, we already had a solid foundation for AI-readable docs:

- `docs.getdbt.com/llms.txt` — a page index for AI systems
- `docs.getdbt.com/llms-full.txt` — full docs content in a single file

> - `.md` suffix support on any docs page for clean markdown output

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `.md` suffix support on any docs page for clean Markdown output
```

The Book is what carrying a chain of careful decisions actually looks like &mdash; bound into one place, delivered to where the next decision gets made.

That's the standard we were trying to meet. Developers shouldn't have to leave their workflow to find docs. The docs &mdash; and all the careful decisions baked into them &mdash; should arrive in the tool they're already using, at the moment they need to evaluate something and move forward.

The dbt MCP server could already handle lineage lookups, test runs, Semantic Layer queries, job debugging. But ask it *"what's the syntax for a snapshot strategy?"* and it might get it right or it might get it wrong or it might improvise. Training data. Best guess. The Book wasn't being "delivered".

✨ **The solution:** We added two tools to the dbt MCP server under a new **"Product Docs"** category — the ninth toolset✨:

- **[`search_product_docs`](/docs/dbt-ai/mcp-available-tools?version=2.0#product-docs)** &mdash; searches docs.getdbt.com and returns titles, URLs, and relevance-ranked descriptions for pages matching your query.

> - **[`get_product_doc_pages`](/docs/dbt-ai/mcp-available-tools?version=2.0#product-docs)** &mdash; fetches the full markdown content of one or more docs pages by path or URL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **[`get_product_doc_pages`](/docs/dbt-ai/mcp-available-tools?version=2.0#product-docs)** &mdash; fetches the full Markdown content of one or more docs pages by path or URL.
```

> The workflow mirrors how a human would use the docs: search first to find what's relevant, then fetch the full content. The difference is that it happens inside whatever AI tool you're already using, without a context switching headache. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workflow mirrors how a human would use the docs: Search first to find what's relevant, then fetch the full content. The difference is that it happens inside whatever AI tool you're already using, without a context switching headache. 
```

Alongside this, [dbt agent skills](https://skills.sh/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills) remain the best path for agents not connected via MCP. The two complement each other: the skill proved the demand; the MCP tools are the native solution.

> ## What this changes day to day

Reviewer 3: Non-blocker suggestion
```suggestion
## How this changes your day-to-day
```

> - Before: write a macro, hit an unfamiliar function, alt-tab to a browser, search docs, read the page, return to your editor, try to remember where you were. Or ask AI and get an answer that may not be grounded in the canonical, current docs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Before: Write a macro, hit an unfamiliar function, alt-tab to a browser, search docs, read the page, return to your editor, try to remember where you were. Or ask AI and get an answer that may not be grounded in the canonical, current docs.
```

> - After: ask Claude or your AI tool directly, get an answer grounded in the canonical, current documentation, keep coding! Docs 🤝 canonical source.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- After: Ask Claude or your AI tool directly, get an answer grounded in the canonical, current documentation, keep coding! Docs 🤝 canonical source.
```

We also added the product docs toolset to dbt's [Developer agent](/docs/dbt-ai/developer-agent?version=2.0) experience &mdash; bringing the docs closer to users in dbt platform and the Studio IDE. 🎉

The Book arrived. No context switch required.

Since we've added the docs toolsets in March, over **1000 unique dbt accounts** have reached for the docs through the dbt MCP server &mdash; and every one of those calls means that a user didn't have to leave their workflow to find the docs they needed. That's a win for users and a win for the docs team.

> And it's growing fast: **338** docs-tool calls in March (the month they launched), **1,113** in April, and over **6,000** in the first couple of weeks of May.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And it's growing fast: **338** docs-tool calls in March (the month they launched), **1,113** in April, and over **6,000** in the first couple weeks of May.
```

<iframe
  src="/charts/mcp-docs-usage.html"
  width="100%"
  height="500"
  style={{border: 'none', borderRadius: '8px', overflow: 'hidden'}}
  title="dbt MCP docs-tool calls per month"
/>

And those calls are mostly coming from *agents* &mdash; autonomous, multi-step tools fetching the docs on a user's behalf while they work through a task. That's a different shape of usage than a chat assistant answering a one-off question: the docs aren't just being looked up, they're being pulled into the work itself.

For analysts exploring a shared project, it means understanding what a model does without navigating to a separate tab. For teams working across different dbt setups, it means consistent, authoritative answers regardless of where they're working or who's asking. For the docs team, it means the work we put into writing and maintaining docs.getdbt.com is doing more than it was before &mdash; reaching users where they actually are.

> <Lightbox src="/img/blog/2026-04-30-the-devil-is-in-the-docs/dwp-wear-chanel.png" width="55%"title="Emily loving that users are faster using the dbt MCP server with the docs tools than without" />

Reviewer 3: 🔥

## What's next

This is the first page of many in this new chapter. But we're planning a few things for the next pages as we continue to try to improve the docs experience:

> - **Version-aware docs fetching**: Right now these tools return current docs. A developer on dbt Core 1.10 asking about incremental strategies gets 2026 docs. Version-aware routing &mdash; returning the right page for the right dbt version &mdash; is the next meaningful improvement, and we're [working](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-mcp/pull/638) through it now!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Version-aware docs fetching**: Right now these tools return current docs. A developer on dbt Core v1.10 asking about incremental strategies gets 2026 docs. Version-aware routing &mdash; returning the right page for the right dbt version &mdash; is the next meaningful improvement, and we're [working](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-mcp/pull/638) through it now!
```

- **Smarter search ranking**: Relevance is good. Relevance tuned to dbt-specific concepts and query patterns would be better.

> - **Coverage gaps as a signal**: usage data tells us which pages answer well and which leave users hunting. Spotting the missing, thin, or outdated ones and fixing them means cleaner answers the next time someone asks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Coverage gaps as a signal**: Usage data tells us which pages answer well and which leave users hunting. Spotting the missing, thin, or outdated ones and fixing them means cleaner answers the next time someone asks.
```

> - **A dedicated dbt docs MCP server** maybe? It's not the right call right now &mdash; one coherent product with an active existing server is the right place to start &mdash; but in the future, maybe a standalone docs server could reach every MCP client regardless of whether they use the dbt MCP server at all?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **A dedicated dbt docs MCP server**: Maybe? It's not the right call right now &mdash; one coherent product with an active existing server is the right place to start &mdash; but in the future, maybe a standalone docs server could reach every MCP client regardless of whether they use the dbt MCP server at all?
```

Earlier this year we'd been discussing docs data and how AI tools are now fetching them to answer questions. The term 'canonical docs' was mentioned and I struggled to understand what it meant and how it was different from the docs we were already building. But then [Google announced their new docs API and MCP server](https://developers.googleblog.com/introducing-the-developer-knowledge-api-and-mcp-server/) &mdash; then it clicked! Docs are now the source of truth (canonical source) and pretty important in the AI era 💃💃💃!

So we chatted about this and toyed with the idea of either:
- Building a new docs MCP server, which meant starting from scratch and building all the infrastructure from the ground up
- Adding docs tools to the existing dbt MCP server, which meant we would need to add the docs toolset category to the existing dbt MCP server (which already has users and is set up)

> - Leaving it alone since we have the docs in [dbt agent skills](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills) (shout out to the amazing work from the DX team!), which is way forward for users who install the dbt agent skills

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Leaving it alone since we have the docs in [dbt agent skills](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills) (shout out to the amazing work from the DX team!), which is the way forward for users who install the dbt agent skills
```

We saw that the dbt MCP server had these benefits:
- Great adoption already, with a ton of infrastructure in place. Adding the docs tools would be a natural extension of that, bringing docs directly to users where they already work.
- Eight toolset categories already but none of them could directly access docs.getdbt.com.
- Open source and free, which also meant every user would get docs access automatically.

But the problem was when an agent needed to answer *"how do I configure incremental models?"* &mdash; there was no guaranteed path to the main source of truth, the current docs.

As mentioned above, we already had a solid foundation for AI-readable docs:

- `docs.getdbt.com/llms.txt` — a page index for AI systems
- `docs.getdbt.com/llms-full.txt` — full docs content in a single file
- `.md` suffix support on any docs page for clean Markdown output
- `AGENTS.md` file that lists how to access the docs via web requests
- A published [`fetching-dbt-docs` skill](https://skills.sh/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills/fetching-dbt-docs) that teaches AI agents how to access our docs via web requests, installed across Claude Code, Copilot, Gemini CLI, and others

> The skill approach works great and relies on the someone installing it and the agent knowing the skill existed We were curious to see what would help bring docs even closer to users.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The skill approach works great and relies on the someone installing it and the agent knowing the skill existed. However, we were curious to see what would help bring docs even closer to users.
```
Noticed the gap in punctuation - this was how I interpreted it but no need to accept my suggestion! Just sharing how my brain filled the gap.

Author: great catch thank you so much @jairus-m !
